Type predicate expressions iteration 2 (#634)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/syntax/expressions.adoc

[[type-predicate-expressions]]
== Type predicate expressions

> _This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9 and extended in 5.10_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._
```

[[type-predicate-expressions-null]]
=== Type predicate expressions for null

> A Cypher type includes the `null` value unless it is explicitly appended with `NOT NULL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of Neo4j 5.10, a Cypher type includes the `null` value unless it is explicitly appended with `NOT NULL`.
```

Therefore, `IS ::` returns `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, unless they explicitly remove it.

[source, cypher]
----
WITH toFloat(null) AS nullValue
RETURN nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN AS isBoolean, nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN NOT NULL AS isNotNullBoolean
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| isBoolean | isNotNullBoolean
| true      | false
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

Likewise, `IS NOT ::` returns `false` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, unless the type is appended with `NOT NULL`.

[source, cypher]
----
WITH (null + 1) AS nullValue
RETURN nullValue IS NOT :: DATE AS isNotDate, nullValue IS NOT :: DATE NOT NULL AS isNotNotNullDate
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| isNotDate | isNotNotNullDate
| false     | true
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

> It is also possible to check whether a value is only the `null` value using the `NULL` type.

Reviewer: Maybe this changes meaning of sentence - but I couldnt understand the meaning as it is currently. 

```suggestion
It is also possible to check whether a value is the only `null` value using the `NULL` type.
```

<expr> IS :: <TYPE>
----

Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is a Cypher Type.

> For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is a Cypher Type.
For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].
```
I'd probably make them one paragraph instead of two 🤷

> Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is one of the following types:

Reviewer 2: If these are all the existing types, could this list not just go away/be combined with the sentence below? I think it's point was to tell which of the types given in `xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms]` could be used but if all of them are now allowed that isn't really that different than just saying something along the lines of 'all the types an their synonyms are supported'

Reviewer 2: Or am I remembering things wrong @Lojjs?

* `ZONED DATETIME`
* `DURATION`
* `POINT`
* `NODE`
* `RELATIONSHIP`
* `MAP`

> * `LIST<TYPE>`

Author: I got stuck with this one, adoc didn't let me do LIST<<TYPE>>, ideas on how to show this?

* `PATH`
* `PROPERTY VALUE`
* `ANY`
* `<TYPE> NOT NULL`

> For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].

Reviewer 2: We definitely need to update `values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc` to say things about `NOT NULL` as it is currently missing but should be covered as part of the type system.

There is also a sentence in there with a TODO that can be acted on now that the expressions allow all types listed there.

Reviewer 2: I can definitely join you on this part if you want

Reviewer 2: speaking of this file, we need to update that list of types and synonyms with the newly introduced types as well (it has some of them such as map and node but not all, for example missing nothing and any. it's just covering the types already mentioned in the types chapter and not the things that are now official types that didn't exist previously.

Author: I updated it a little, but we can go over it together tomorrow if you are free :)

[[type-predicate-expressions-null]]
=== Type predicate expressions for null

> A Cypher type will include the `null` value unless it is appended explicitly with `NOT NULL`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Cypher type includes the `null` value unless it is explicitly appended with `NOT NULL`.
```

> Therefore, `IS ::` will return `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, which do not explicitly remove it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, `IS ::` returns `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, unless they do not explicitly remove it.
```

The usage of the explicit `they` clears the ambiguity of whether `which` refers to `null`, as its default in grammar is, or to a previous term `expressions` (as intended in this case).

Author: This no longer feels natural in English. `Unless` is a negating condition and that alongside the `do not` is hard to read. I think it might even make the sentence incorrect.

Suggestion:

Therefore, `IS ::` returns `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, unless they explicitly remove it.

Reviewer 3: You are right, the `not` slipped there from the initial sentence. Do take it away :)

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> WITH (toFloat(null)) AS nullValue

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WITH toFloat(null) AS nullValue
```

I just tested it and the surrounding parenthesis are not needed - unless there is a specific reason to have them? :thinking:

Reviewer 2: Me and Louise added them to the original line to show it was allowed, it was more useful in the other example with an addition I think even if it wasn't needed there either. Might not be needed in all places using the `toFloat` if there's more than one

Reviewer 3: I marked it everywhere I saw it in this PR, and I'd recommend taking it away since there is no extra meaning carried by them. I assume developers know that they can put as many surrounding parenthesis as they wish (and this is not specific to Cypher) ... and if they don't know, we don't need to teach them here :D

Reviewer 2: My initial comment was to add it to the addition to clarify the example (`null + 1 IS NOT :: DATE` is a bit harder to read than `(null + 1) IS NOT :: DATE` even if it means the same thing), it just happened to be added everywhere, I'm fine with removing it from the toFloat examples

Reviewer 3: Agreed! I do think it looks nice on math operations.

RETURN nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN AS isBoolean, nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN NOT NULL AS isNotNullBoolean
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| isBoolean | isNotNullBoolean
| true      | false
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

> Likewise, `IS NOT ::` will return `false` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, if the type is not appended with `NOT NULL`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Likewise, `IS NOT ::` returns `false` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, unless the type is appended with `NOT NULL`.
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
WITH (null + 1) AS nullValue
RETURN nullValue IS NOT :: DATE AS isNotDate, nullValue IS NOT :: DATE NOT NULL AS isNotNotNullDate
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| isNotDate | isNotNotNullDate
| false     | true
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

It is also possible to check whether a value is only the `null` value using the `NULL` type.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> WITH (toFloat(null)) AS nullValue

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WITH toFloat(null) AS nullValue
```

[[type-predicate-expressions-null]]
=== Type predicate expressions for null

> A Cypher type will include the `null` value unless it is prepended explicitly with `NOT NULL`.

Reviewer 2: not `prepended` I think, I believe that would be something like `NOT NULL INTEGER` instead of `INTEGER NOT NULL`. I think maybe `appended` (`suffixed`?) or something is a better choice

Therefore, `IS ::` will return `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, which do not explicitly remove it.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
WITH (toFloat(null)) AS nullValue
RETURN nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN AS isBoolean, nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN NOT NULL AS isNotNullBoolean
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| isBoolean | isNotNullBoolean
| true      | false
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

> Likewise, `IS NOT ::` will return `false` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, if the type is not prepended with `NOT NULL`.

Reviewer 2: same here, `prepended`

<expr> IS NOT TYPED <TYPE>
----

[[type-predicate-expressions-any-and-nothing]]

> === Use of `ANY` and `NOTHING` types
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Use of `ANY` and `NOTHING` types

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.10._
```

The `ANY` type is a supertype which matches values of all types.

> On the other hand, the `NOTHING` type is the type containing an empty set of values. This means that it returns `false` for all values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ANY` is a supertype which matches values of all types.
`NOTHING` is a type containing an empty set of values.
This means that it returns `false` for all values.
```

[source, cypher]
----
RETURN 42 IS :: ANY AS isOfTypeAny, 42 IS :: NOTHING AS isOfTypeNothing
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| isOfTypeAny | isOfTypeNothing
| true        | false
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-lists]]

> === List Types
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== List Types

_This feature was introduced in 5.10._
```

> Type predicate expressions can be used for `LIST` types, where the inner type of the list must be specified.

Reviewer: Maybe 'elements' is not correct here, but I think it clarifies the below mentions of "inner type"

```suggestion
Type predicate expressions can be used for `LIST` types, where the inner type of the elements in the list must be specified.
```

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

> The type `PROPERTY VALUE` can also be used to check for whether a type is storable as a property.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The type `PROPERTY VALUE` can also be used to check whether a type is storable as a property.
```

> Non-storable properties, such as `MAP`, will return `false` when checked with `IS :: PROPERTY VALUE`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Types not storable in properties, such as `MAP`, return `false` when checked with `IS :: PROPERTY VALUE`.
```

<expr> IS NOT TYPED <TYPE>
----

[[type-predicate-expressions-any-and-nothing]]

> === Use of Any and Nothing types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Use of `ANY` and `NOTHING` types
```

> The `ANY` type is a supertype of all types and will therefore match on everything.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `ANY` type is a supertype which matches any type.
```

Author: Saying it this way is not very helpful though? I would prefer not to use the name of the type to describe what it matches on, also just saying supertype doesn't imply it is of all types, so that information is also useful to keep :)

Reviewer 3: > Saying it this way is not very helpful though?

Why not? To a reader, the important bit of information is that _use `ANY` -> match any type_. Then, the fact that the supertype is of all types (and honestly even that it _is_ a supertype at all) is an implementation detail that doesn't further help users. To my eyes, what they care about is that

1. `ANY` is a _type_, so I can use it in any type expression
2. `ANY` matches all types, and acts a bit like a type-wildcard.

If you don't agree, what extra valuable information do you think users get from knowing that it's a _supertype of all types_? Can you come up with a situation where knowing that extra bit allows you to succeed, while not knowing it makes your life harder?

Reviewer 2: One thing about the sentence 
```
The `ANY` type is a supertype which matches any type.
```
that I don't particularly like is that it feels like it says nothing by repeating the word `ANY`. 

Maybe something like
```suggestion
The `ANY` type is a supertype which matches values of all types.
```
instead?

Author: Yes, because supertype does not imply all types are below it, it implies at least 1 type is. Number is a supertype of Int and float for example, but it is not a supertype of all types.

It is not generally useful to read a description that uses the same word to describe the word, for example if we used this description for a different type:

The `INTEGER` type is a  supertype which matches integer types.

I have not gained any extra information here. I do not know that Integer matches INT32 and INT64 for example. Describing what a type word means using different words is more useful.

Also technically it doesn't match on a type, it is matching on a value from an expression. New suggestion:

The `ANY` type is a supertype of all Cypher types which evaluates to true for all given expressions.

Reviewer 3: > The `ANY` type is a supertype which matches values of all types.

Yes, I like this!

Reviewer 3: > The INTEGER type is a supertype which matches integer types.
I have not gained any extra information here. I do not know that Integer matches INT32 and INT64 for example. 

Definitely, but if the supertype is of _all_ types, there is no ambiguity on what types it includes. I do agree the repeated usage of `any` was wrong, but There's suggestion cleared it :)

> The `NOTHING` type is however the type containing an empty set of values. This means that it will return `false` for all values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the other hand, the `NOTHING` type is the type containing an empty set of values. This means that it returns `false` for all values.
```

Reviewer 3: A curiosity that may potentially result in an extra example here: is there any good use case for `IS :: NOTHING`? When would I want to check that a variable is of _no_ type? How can I even get a variable that is of no type? :thinking:

Author: The use case is for LIST<NOTHING>, so an empty list :)

Reviewer 2: I think the only place you can have something with no type is for empty lists: the inner type of the list is `NOTHING` -> `LIST<NOTHING>`. We don't block the user from writing `IS :: NOTHING` but it'll always be false 🤷

Reviewer 3: > is for empty lists: the inner type of the list is NOTHING -> LIST<NOTHING>. 

And when what I would want to do that? What do I do with a `LIST<NOTHING>`? :thinking: 

> We don't block the user from writing IS :: NOTHING but it'll always be false

Is it a meaningful feature then? :thinking:

Reviewer 2: > What do I do with a `LIST<NOTHING>`?

Confirm if your list is empty or if it has any values in it:
```
[] IS :: LIST<NOTHING> --> true

[null] IS :: LIST<NOTHING> --> false
[1] IS :: LIST<NOTHING> --> false
[true] IS :: LIST<NOTHING> --> false
```

> Is it a meaningful feature then? 🤔

Not to use, but it also feels very odd to block it since it can be an inner type (I guess any examples for it should be with lists but I didn't look that closely on the section to remember what's there), so for consistency it's allowed. (It is also specified as a type in GQL if I remember correctly so it is a general type we should allow the use of.)

Reviewer 3: > Confirm if your list is empty or if it has any values in it:
[] IS :: LIST<NOTHING> --> true

Yeah, although I find much less opaque checking for `var = []`. Shorter and more clearer what its effect is.

Regardless, thanks for clarifying.

Author: It isn't actually specified in GQL, but it is required for the valueType() function that is coming. That function must give the most precise type, for an empty list, according to GQL that is the smallest type. If we don't have `NOTHING`, then the smallest type is either `NULL` or `BOOLEAN`, depending on how we approached it, it was decided that it is confusing to return `LIST<BOOLEAN>` for empty lists, especially in cases where a user is testing a bunch of lists and none of them contain bools. So it is better with `LIST<NOTHING>`.

Another reason is because of list concatenation semantics.

`LIST<NOTHING> + LIST<STRING NOT NULL> = LIST<STRING NOT NULL>`
`[] + ["hi"] = ["hi"] == LIST<STRING NOT NULL>`

if an empty list was `LIST<NULL>` then:
`LIST<NULL> + LIST<STRING NOT NULL> = LIST<STRING>  != LIST<STRING NOT NULL>`
or if an empty list was `LIST<BOOLEAN>` then this is even worse:
`LIST<BOOLEAN> + LIST<STRING NOT NULL> = LIST<BOOLEAN | STRING>  != LIST<STRING NOT NULL>`

So an addition with an empty list would change the type! But as `NOTHING` is a subtype of all types, it plays nice in these cases :D

Reviewer 2: > that may potentially result in an extra example

I think it might make sense to add an example of `LIST<NOTHING>` showing an empty list as well as a non-empty list to have a 'useful' example case of `NOTHING`

Author: This is already there :) Under the list types part (the next section)
